---
layout: post
title: "Do We Deserve?"
date: 2019-7-23
description:
image: assets/images/deserve-1.jpg
author: anand
tags: [Philosophy, Society, Meaning]
featured: true
hidden: false
categories: [ Philosophy ]
---
It was right outside my office today. I was walking. Minding my own business. Lost in my own inevitable reflections. And then, out of the blue, it hit me. A thought. One that opened an uninterrupted stream of wonderment. *What does it mean to deserve something? When do we know that we deserve? Does someone else decide for us?*

I began to understand this thought and as it happened, I started to analyse what sprang to my mind. We talk about deserving respect from people, deserving someone's love or friendship, deserving a job or a position in society and about deserving all the good or bad things in the world. The question *what is the intrinsic meaning of deserving gripped my mind.*

I had to find an answer and for that I had to begin somewhere. Believe it or not, to find that start, I looked it up in the Oxford dictionary. And this is how the verb *deserve* is defined literally - *if someone or something deserves something, it is right that they should have it, because of the way they have behaved or because of what they are.*

I totally understood the part where it says, *it is right that they should have it.* But, then the *because* captivated my mind further and I was plunged in even deeper contemplation. I thought and said to myself - *today I will attain enlightenment!* Funnily enough, I might have learnt a few important things from this little experience of mine. Let's analyse the two reasons to deserve something.

### **Because of the way you have behaved**
Let's talk about friendship. What do we do that enables us to make friends? One of the most vital bonds between two friends is that of sharing. We meet someone, we talk, we begin to like them and crave for their friendship. The talking that began as trivial and formal chat leads way to sharing things that matter. Here begins the sharing of similarities, dreams, emotions, highs and lows and secrets. A trust is established. *Trust leads to vulnerability.* And when we are courageous enough to be vulnerable before someone, that's when friendship, in its truest and non-facebook sense, happens. What does this tell us?

Friendship takes persistent hard work. And so does everything worthwhile in life. Whatever it is that matters to us, step by step, slowly and steadily, we work towards it and hope that all the hard work will pay off. That if we are persistent enough, little and consistent steps will get us the desired goal or destination. Whether, it is a job or someone's love, we work hard to get it. Whether it is respect or social status, we work hard to get it. Consistently. Intently. Because this is the *behaviour* that makes us worthy. This is the *behaviour* that makes us *deserving.*

### **Because of what you are**
There can be many interpretations of *what you are.* Deciphering this took more effort than understanding the behaviour that makes us deserving. But, anyway, I was already inspired and intent to keep looking.

I figured that it is your ability to do something that makes you who you are. This ability can be natural and innate or it can be something that was deliberately developed over time. Think about getting a job you desire so much. Every job in the world needs some kind of talent, some set of abilities. And if you want to excel, you need those abilities.

What makes a poet deserve poetry? Ability to put abstract thought so beautifully into words that the reader, caught unaware, feels the words and gets lost into appreciation. And this ability makes the poets *what they are.* And I felt that this interpretation of being what we are applies everywhere.

The ability to understand and appreciate makes us a *deserving* friend, the ability to do good earns us respect that we *deserve*, the ability to love someone unconditionally earns us their love (that we *deserve*), in turn. The ability to put logic into beautiful code and design makes you a *deserving* computer engineer. And on it goes.

### **The overtone**
What about the negative connotation though? A person may *deserve* to be punished or to be hated. The above two reasons bode well even in such scenarios. To describe it tacitly, the ability to harm others (for selfish, ulterior motives) and reckless use of this ability (exhibiting the desired behaviour) makes some *deserving* of hatred.

### **Who decides that we deserve?**
As humans, we have this innate and incomprehensible ability to learn things. Neocortical beings that we are, the ability to reason, perceive and learn is what makes us more capable than any other living specie. The point being, with enough intent, we can be *deserving* of anything that we can learn, practice and transform into a behaviour.

Sometimes, our current position in society or in a hierarchy implies that it is the people *above* us who decide what we are and we deserve. But, the power to change that lies within. So, the whole question of who decides becomes rather rhetorical. I think, by now, I probably have established it clearly to say this -

*Good or bad, you decide what you deserve.* Period. The question is how responsibly do we make that decision?
