---
layout: post
title: "Leisure And The Art Of Change"
date: 2019-9-08
description: "On boredom, leisure, time and self-transformation "
image: assets/images/leisure-1.jpg
author: anand
tags: [Self-transformation, Productivity, Time Management]
featured: true
hidden: false
categories: [ Self, Productivity ]
---
This is a story of change. As we go along with life, sometimes, we start living in a robotic and mechanical manner. There are left a very few opportunities to stop and contemplate. Our routines, sometimes dictate life. Routines are good when the result is a habit that makes us better; more productive. Routines of embellishment are good. But, *routines* can become *ruts* and that's exactly when we might need to stop and think.

Routines are inevitable and omnipresent. And they are always interspersed with durations of time when we are *free*. And *free*, here, means not being in a controlled environment. Idiosyncratically, we chose how to spend such free durations (or leisure or time-off). Leisure is when we can do whatever we like to.

Though, inherently, leisure warrants indulging in unmanaged and uncontrolled activities that help us re-energise; failure or inability to chose such activities leads to boredom and other passive outcomes. This leads to an ironic observation : sometimes (and we should really think about it), time off needs to be time managed.

### **Unmanaged Leisure**
All of us experience boredom. Generally and from personal experience, boredom is at its peak when we just drift around with no specific goal in mind. When we talk about a goal, it need not be a very big life goal. It can be something as small (and as useful) as reading a book or just a chapter or even just a page.

In leisure, usually, we don't have a goal in mind. It is, as we call it colloquially, *time pass*. But, there can be more to leisure than killing time. If we want it, of course. During our lifetime, we pick up a lot of skills and learn them. What I have realised, with experiments done to my own time, meaningfully filling the empty gaps in time (when we are all drifting and call it leisure) is, in itself, a great life skill. But, why do we need it?

[Research](https://www.psychologytoday.com/intl/blog/why-bad-looks-good/201908/how-liven-leisure-time-and-beat-boredom) has shown that boredom can lead to negative outcomes and a pessimistic mindset. In many cases, people have shown to develop compulsive and even destructive behaviour. Inclination and addiction to drugs and alcohol and even internet addiction were some of the unwanted behaviours observed. Furthermore, it has been observed that effectively managing leisure reduces boredom. Hence, it might be in our own greater good to not neglect such an important skill, after all.

### **Busting Ruts**
Apart from unmanaged leisure, ruts (or habits that have become dull and unproductive) are another boredom inducing agents. In my experience, any activity, be it day to day work, a hobby or any other task that starts to feel too mechanical (not involving much brain work) can become a rut. And when it does, it can potentially have depressing effects. More or less very similar to what we discussed in case of boredom.

In fact, ruts are agents of boredom. Routines are good. They make us disciplined, effective and goal oriented. But, when routines become ruts, they can cause the exact opposite effects and hence, we should know when it is time to move on and change the routine. Or what I prefer to call busting ruts.

Now, moving on is an art. It is not practical to change any routine at our whim. Some routines are essential to earn a living. To live. In essence, moving on is not a simple and linear process. It takes thought, work and most importantly, time. And what better time to utilise (arbitrarily and whimsically!) than the available hours of leisure?

Managed properly, leisure can become an agent that does away with boredom and opens avenues of change that can positively impact our lives in an unprecedented manner.

### **Leisure : An Agent of Change**
How can leisure be an agent of change? [Why link leisure and transformation?](https://www.sagamorepub.com/sites/default/files/2018-07/galley_0.pdf)

>> To be free to explore, to test, or to remake one's self lends itself to the process of transformation. Without the opportunity to pursue those experiences of interest that provide opportunities for self-discovery as well as the acquisition of new knowledge, skills, and attitudes, transformation is not possible. In a world where individuals are increasingly confronted with change, they will need time and space in their lives to rethink, renew, and reinvent themselves.

So, if we want to transform our lives (meaningfully) and we are willing to put in the required efforts, what, again, is the best time we have? Leisure. And that's why I call leisure an agent of change.

If there is a clear goal that needs to be chased and achieved, then it is imperative that we learn to make leisure efficient and productive. Leisure is that window of opportunity (to self-transformation) that is hardly seen and thus, always missed.

Every achievement and every success in the world (past, present and future) is made possible when we learn to manage time.

>> Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been; I am also call'd No-more, Too-late, Farewell

### **Time - The Greatest Manufacturer**
*Charles Dickens*, in *Hard Times*, considered time to be the greatest and longest established spinner and manufacturer of all. To quote from the book :

>> But his factory is a secret place, his work is noiseless, and his Hands are mutes.

A good explanation to the above line is that we can watch the passing of time, unwary of its incessant movement, unwary of what threads it is spinning, but, time does its silent work and keeps changing (itself and everything around). It has no desire whatsoever to get noticed or captivate. It is us who need to take notice. And it is for us to decide how this great manufacturer works on us and lead us to continuous transformation. For there is no doubt, the gift of time is the greatest natural endowment we have.
